2.40 pm recap In a series of almost unbelievable events chief cabinet secretary Yukio Edano has admitted that the official statements about the radiation levels at the Fukushima site have been understated by 1000, that is by three orders of magnitude. 

This puts the disaster potentially in the same league as Chernobyl, even though the technology used there was more inherently dangerous than at Fukushima.

It is difficult to believe that Tokyo Electric and the government of Japan are so fundamentally ignorant of the situation that measurements given in micro sieverts should have been designated in  milli sieverts, a metric which is one thousand times higher.



While the enormity of this screw up or deception sinks in, a fourth reactor has experienced an explosion at the Fukushima complex, attributed to a build up of hydrogen gas.  Reactor No 4 had been shut down before the earthquake and tsunami struck, according to some reports never to be reactivated as the entire six reactor array is governed by a 40 year licence that expires within weeks.

In an incredibly confused set of statements the government says there was a radioactivity release at the No 4 reactor but not at the No 2 reactor, which contradicts what it said only hours earlier.

The serious issue in this is that it defies credibility to accept that Tokyo Electric and the nuclear authority scientists did not read or hear the spoken radiation levels being described as being in micro sieverts when they would have known fully that they were milli sieverts. 

This is an overwhelmingly unbelievably screwed up nuclear calamity that now looks far more serious than anyone could have imagined earlier today. 

Edano also said the radiation levels were harmful to health. Which is a spectacular understatement. Apart from the compulsory evacuations that have occurred within 20 kilometres of the Fukushima No 1 complex, those living up to 30 kilometres away (and fortunate enough to have homes) have been told to stay indoors. The exclusion zone around Chernobyl is 30 kilometres.



At 11.50 am NHK was reporting government officials as saying ‘a low level of harm to human life’  is occurring in the vicinity of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant where all three active reactors have now suffered explosions.

This morning’s explosion in the No 2 reactor is however different. The radiation level outside the complex has been recorded as being eight times in excess of the annual safe limit for human exposure every hour.

Reports of a serious rise in radiation levels at Ibaraki, halfway between Fukishima and Tokyo have appeared in the national media.

While something may have been lost in translation, the government health officials quoted by NHK appear to be confirming human harm, but only ‘small’ harm.

The evasive statements made by the government and Tokyo Electric this morning separately confirmed there had been a blast earlier today in the Daiichi No 2 reactor and that radiation levels had risen, only temporarily, but resisted reporter attempts to have them connect the two revelations in the one sentence.

However the statements did specifically mention that there had been structural damage to the containment of the No 2 reactor, and followed revelations that the coolant had drained from the core, completely exposing the fuel and control rods at least twice, which are said to be partially exposed at this hour.


