Today’s very steep profit downgrade to a loss of between -$30 million to -$80 million for Virgin Blue in its full financial year to June 30 is reason to query some of the truisms about air travel that airlines frequently make.

Such as the claims by both Qantas and Virgin Blue that business travel domestically is ‘rebounding’, and specifically, claims by Virgin Blue CEO John Borghetti that capturing more of the corporate market with a higher quality business travel product will reduce its exposure to the leisure market.

There is simply no evidence, that is, independent evidence that can be audited,  that when leisure travel activity falls it doesn’t take business travel activity down with it.

Or vice versa. The exposure that Virgin Blue cannot avoid anymore than its competitors is to downturns in general economic activity and rises in fuel costs.

That fact is that when times get tough for business they get tough for leisure or ‘discretionary travel’ because they are inextricably linked.  If you work for a corporation that generates substantial air travel, and consumer sentiment weakens, so does the economy in general. Just as consumers reduce their discretionary spending, so does the discretionary adjective get increasingly applied to the business travel spend as management seeks costs savings wherever it can get them,  including the frequency and  class of travel, if it hasn’t already banned business class.

Nor do airlines actually know with precision how much of the travel they carry in any jet is strictly business or corporate. It isn’t measured. It is guessed. The corporate account market IS measured, in so far as the accounts are managed centrally according to travel policy rules but the devil in the detail is that since Virgin Blue sustained the expansion of air travel in Australia with cheap fares by not imitating Compass, Compass 11, Impulse or Oz Jet,  a whole new and it seems very large type of business traveller arose.

These are the  self funded or SME business travellers. And they don’t use corporate account managers, or wear ties, or in most cases, fly at anything but the very cheapest fare they can get, as they often actually pay for it  out of their own pockets or fixed budgets. They are indistinguishable from discretionary leisure travellers.

There is no doubt that Borghetti is right about the desirability of winning corporate accounts from Qantas, but he also has to prise them out of Jetstar and Tiger aircraft too, a task that both carriers assist by being thoroughly obnoxious to fly with.

So the problem with Borghetti’s emphasis on business travel is that it is a drastic oversimplification of a very complex but very real process by which we,  the flyers,  are being induced or punted into, the middle ground, which is an economy class seat at a reasonable price with good frequency and reliability, no ridiculous check-in deadlines or nasty tricky little rules, and a modicum of quality and room for the kneecaps.

This is also the same middle ground where one finds many discretionary leisure or family related travellers who have worked out that $1 fares generally do not exist after the first few seconds of their release, because of the race between the reservations computer imitating the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor complex and melting, or the pathetically small number of such fares available being sold out in the blink of an eye.

If a wider look is taken at this middle ground, which was the obsession of Virgin Blue up until Brett Godfrey decided he needed a break, we can see that the natural source of such travellers for Qantas and Virgin Blue comprises those who will never fly Jetstar or Tiger again, or who used to fly in business class in the glory days of Ansett and a rather different Qantas to the one we currently have, before company travel management policies began to imitate the benevolent sophistication of Stalinist agrarian reforms.

Incidentally, in recent weeks there has been very little in the way of really cheap fares on any of the Australian airlines, at least if you need to travel within a week or so of booking.

Compare the two screen grabs made this afternoon of available fares between Sydney and Melbourne tomorrow, on Qantas and Virgin Blue.



The really cheap fares that used to populate the left hand side of the booking screens are, believe me on this, exceedingly rare, if not extinct. This week I scored a peak hour flight to Melbourne on Virgin Blue from Sydney for $195 but for the peak period return fare, the cheapest was $217 on Qantas, which was undercutting similarly timed flights on it’s punitive Jetstar subsidiary (no knees)  and Virgin Blue (no free biscuits and juice)  by around $78!


