One step forward, one step back. Elation, tempered by frustration. 



These are the yin and yang senses in the Gillard camp as the PM flies back to Australia today following what should have been an unqualified triumph: a full White House reception extending to a schools visit, an address to a joint sitting of the US Congress, and meetings with all the key figures including the United Nations, General Secretary, Ban Ki-moon.

But for the still new-at-the-job Julia Gillard, struggling to stamp her authority on the prime ministership at home and abroad, Kevin Rudd, the man she displaced last June, remains a fly in the ointment.



His free-lancing style on Libya is undermining her authority, muddying her message and generally confusing things.

This is partly inevitable. The continued presence of a former prime minister in the Cabinet was always fraught.

It is usually best if the vanquished goes quietly. Which is why Kevin Rudd’s decision to hang around after his execution, worried some in the Government that vengeance loomed. A hung parliament, however, changed all that.

Suddenly they needed him. Labor MPs went from hoping he would go quietly, to forlornly hoping he’d stay quietly. 

But Mr Rudd is not exactly staying quietly. Indeed he is behaving like he still runs policy, and can speak on behalf of the Government without need for day to day contact and coordination with the PM.

Colleagues worry that cabinet government, which meant little when he was in charge, means even less to him now.

Stephen Smith, who was forced to make way for Rudd in the foreign affairs port-folio, once remarked that there should never be more than a cigarette paper between the foreign minister and the prime minister.

He was right of course. The politics of international relations and power diplomacy, where words are bullets and even subtle shifts in emphasis can be read as major shifts in intent, requires that those speaking on behalf of the government remain in absolute lock-step.

Nobody knows this more keenly than Mr Rudd, a life-long foreign policy specialist, who’s also been PM.

Julia Gillard knows this too which is why her attempts in the US to play down differences between the pair over a no-fly zone in Libya, have been little short of embarrassing. 

Like it or not, the world has effectively been getting two messages from Australia. 

The one from her is that the international community is working diligently to identify a way to protect innocent lives in Libya, with all options, including it must be said, a no-fly zone, still on the table. She has explicitly stated that she does not support a narrowing of those options yet. 

Ordinarily that would be the end of it - the definitive Australian position ennunciated by the PM and arrived at in the full knowledge that Australia has a marginal role in the discussion and would have literally no role in whatever action is agreed. 

During her week in the US, Ms Gillard has been hearing that while some legislators favour a military intervention to enforce a no-fly zone, others, with more executive weight - read the President - are cautious. 

Defence Secretary Robert Gates has warned a no-fly zone would entail more military action than many understand and cost a lot of lives, not to mention a high financial cost for a country bumping against a $14.3 trillion federal government debt ceiling. Between President Obama and Secretary Gates then, there is no division.

Compare that to Australia. While Ms Gillard has been consulting the Obama Administration, and gauging the support for various options with the people who would actually have to do it, the other official message from Kevin Rudd, as set out in numerous tweets and interviews, is that a no-fly zone is “the next logical step,’’ and the lesser of two evils. 

He has been streaking around the Middle East engaging in a kind of shuttle diplomacy between various leaders aimed at getting an immediate no-fly zone established. 

His argument is that the world should not delay because to do so risks, as he has widely argued, another Rwanda, or Srebrenica, or even a Guernica - where the Hitler’s Luftwaffe carpet bombed a Spanish village just before the Second World War - a forerunner to the notorious blitzkrieg.

Of course, that may well be right. But some suspect he’s just as interested in cornering his inexperienced successor in a debate that would see him alone emerge on the right side of history. 

Facing continuing questions in New York over the obvious difference, Ms Gillard revealed she had not spoken to Mr Rudd on the issue in the previous 24 hours. Word is, it has been a lot longer than that. 

It was a remarkable admission given the weight of this issue, the perception of their divergence, and the need for absolute clarity. 

Her explanation that his departmental head, Dennis Richardson was travelling with her and that he was in contact. 

Yes, it is normal for the DFAT head to accompany the PM when abroad. But it with this definitional issue dominating, her reliance on passing messages through only served to show how toxic their relationship is.

This is a seminal battle. The challenge for Julia Gillard is to own foreign policy - to wrest it from her predecessor. Without that, she’s dead as a leader. It may mean imposing a no-fly zone of her own by clipping the wings of her peripatetic Foreign Affairs Minister.


