It’s Maundy Thursday, the holy day that one Punch staffer thought for years was “Monday Thursday”; some weird hybrid day. 



For many, Maundy (or ‘Holy’) Thursday is the start of a very sacred few days. For most, it’s the last day of work before we gorge, binge, and maybe later repent. 

In the Christian tradition, today commemorates the Last Supper; so feasting – particularly if it involves bread and wine - is pretty much encouraged.



And of course most of you know that Easter has its roots firmly in pagan traditions, and the pagans were most definitely not immune to a bit of bawdy celebration. 

Enjoy. Happy Easter from us.

Now, without getting too religious about this holiday, it seems fitting to take a bit of pre-Easter time out to reflect on where we’re at. 

Things have been fairly nasty recently. Nature’s been a bitch. The proverbial has hit the fan across the Middle East. The political world has seemed spiteful … or do we mean even more spiteful than usual? 

So here’s the thing – even if you don’t believe in God, or even if you don’t believe in Jesus as a historical figure, his is a narrative that, by most interpretations, encourages empathy, compassion, generosity, forgiveness. 

So what would Jesus do on the big issues of today? 

(For the uninitiated, What Would Jesus Do became a fallback thought pattern for the morally retarded some time in the 90s. So that’s sort of an ironic retro reference that we’re going to segue into a more earnest point).

WWJD (yes, we’re using that) about climate change? 

For a start, there’s a lot of stuff around about honouring God’s creation, so Jesus would probably be all about environmentalism. Or would he? Because the Bible also talks about man subduing the Earth, being the real top dog. 

But then again there’s the stuff about reaping what you sow, which would seem to indicate that if you screw around with nature, it could bite you on the arse. 

Not to mention Revelation 7:3: “Do not harm the earth or the sea or the trees”. Then there’s the taxes - render unto Caesar… 

WWJD about obesity?

Despite the bread and wine imbibing, there are many Bible passages that warn about greed and gluttony. And don’t forget Corinthians 6:19 – your body is a temple. Although sacred spaces are where wine was drunk, so that’s a little confusing.

Then there’s Proverbs 23:20 – “Do not be with heavy drinkers of wine, Or with gluttonous eaters of meat”. 

Eek. Let’s focus on turning water into wine, shall we? 

WWJD about Libya?

For this one, we spoke to one of the brightest religious minds around – but we’re not going to name him because we may well be making a hash of this and don’t want to drag him into it. Anyway, he pointed out that much of what is happening in the Middle East at the moment has parallels with Jesus’ journey. 

Oppression, civil disobedience, and so on. 

The most obvious Biblical passage on war is Exodus 20:13: Thou shalt not kill. But then the Bible is also full of war, in Heaven and on Earth. And we’ve seen those legendary warmongers in the US use Christian dogma to justify many wars, past and present. 

Then there’s the eerily prophetic (in the same way that star signs can seem prescient) Matthew 24:6-8:

And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet. 

For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places. 

All these are the beginning of sorrows.

Yikes. 

So it seems asking “WWJD?” returns answers about as murky as a psychic eight-ball. 

But one thing Jesus was pretty clear on was the Golden Rule – do unto others. Love them as I have loved you. Love thy neighbour. Etcetera.

And there it is – empathy. Arguably the basis of all ethics. In an age of being and staying on message (even if that message is a load of crap) this is a message that should have a bit more currency. 

The beautiful thing about the Golden Rule is that it transcends all religions and cultures and has been iterated and reiterated throughout history. 

So we’ll leave it there. Do unto others. Buy others the dark chocolate eggs that you in turn would like bought for you. Happy Easter! 

And first person to use the phrase ‘sky fairy’ gets a mini, 20c chocolate egg. That you have to pick up yourself. From our Adelaide office.


