A slight sojourn from Scott’s tales of gastro, dealing with Indian traffic and concrete dinosaurs…

This travel blog may be new, but Crikey’s been interested in wandering the world via the written word for quite a while now.

Subscribers of the Daily Mail might be familiar with our Letter from… series. Basically, various Crikey readers and writers pen us a letter from an exotic — or otherwise — overseas destination. They’re often political, sometimes jealousy inducing and occasionally troubling.

Like, the latest entry, from Grant Doyle in Tunisia:

Imagine wherever you went in Australia there’d be posters, bigger than billboards, of a smirking Kevin Rudd staring at you, one hand on heart and the other fiddling with his shirt sleeve. Imagine if the same picture also adorned bus stops, notice boards,  buildings such as banks and post offices, if it dangled from flag poles and peeled from cafe walls, or was Blu-Tacked on windows in department stores. About the only place exempt might be a pubic toilet.

Well, in Tunisia, wedged between Algeria and Libya on Africa’s Mediterranean coast, President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali’s heavily Photoshopped image is everywhere. And has been for more than 20 years because Ali keeps changing the constitution to allow himself to serve yet another five-year presidential term. He’s in his fifth such stint now. And there’s not much chance Ali (or his Reassemblement Constitutionnel Democratique [RCD] party) will ever likely be threatened at the ballot box for this is effectively a one-party state.

At the national elections last October,  Ali achieved his worst result, with only 90% of the vote. This down from a high point of 99% in 1989, 1994 and 1999. A semblance of an opposition party is tolerated, although any candidates must be authorised by a Constitutional Council, an institution firmly under the thumb of Ali’s party…

Click here for the rest of the Tunisian tale.

While this blog is mainly the travel writings of Scott Bridges, it’s also a place for discussing the other aspects of travel; from the business side of the travel industry, to political and environmental issues and Crikey readers’ own stories and travel photos. Stay tuned in the coming weeks for these developments.

And while you’re waiting, go check out Sue Stanton’s guest post on the Northern Myth blog, reporting from Gafsa, Tunisia.

More Tunisia? Is this some type of trend? You read it here first: Tunisia, the hot travel spot for 2010 (well, for December 2009 at least.)


