Like every other family values-oriented Australian I have been deeply impressed this week by Charlie Sheen’s commitment to his children and his efforts to avenge their removal from his custody by removing their mother’s teeth.



You rarely get that sort of passionate parenting these days.

As many people will know, Sheen’s two-year-old twins were placed in the care of his ex-wife Brooke Mueller and taken away from the house he shares with two porn stars.



Obviously questions need to be raised here about the judgement of welfare authorities in California. I mean what sort of warped social worker would take a young child away from two mothers and replace them with just one?

There is also the important question of who is the best role model for the twins - who despite being called Bob and Max were not christened in Sydney’s eastern suburbs.

It is vital that children at such a tender age get every possible advantage in life, and yet this doesn’t appear to be happening in this sad case.

For example, Charlie - as we all know - has tiger blood. Brooke, as far as anyone can gather, merely has human blood. Yet who have the authorities put these children with? You guessed it, the weakling. It’s called evolution, people.

There have also been the unkind aspersions cast on Charlie that he is still affected by drugs in some way.

This has been based on the flimsiest pretext that he makes overly exaggerated physical gestures, uses big words that he clearly doesn’t know the meaning of and tries to give the impression that he is highly intelligent despite uttering only crazed gibberish.

Has it ever occurred to anyone he is simply behaving like an actor?

The whole situation brings to mind another cruelly maligned victim of the mass media, Colonel Gaddafi.

The Colonel this week was clearly set-up by tabloid TV network the BBC, who attempted to verbal him into admuitting that something was wrong in Libya.

Clearly nothing could be further from the truth, as Gaddafi patiently tried to explain: “They love me, all my people with me. They love me all.”

One has to wonder what part of “They love me all” the BBC doesn’t understand.

Indeed both men can rightly claim to have been mercilessly hounded, manipulated and exploited by a bloodsucking media, a condition Charlie - who has tiger’s blood dripping from his fangs - knows only too well.

In fact Sheen and the media have even more in common, given that both of them have great difficulty in saying no to Charlie.

But of course, I jest. Sheen and Gaddafi are not genuinely comparable, anymore than you can compare Al Qaeda with a Hollywood divorce. One causes the bloody and callous destruction of innocent lives and the other’s just a terrorist organisation.


