The Palace is not amused. A royal edict, delivered not by chariot with unfurled parchment, but via grey-suits and sneaky lawyer speak, has decreed there shall be no Chaser royal wedding coverage. Oh, well. No big loss.



Let’s face it, you were either going to salivate over every second of the straight Royal Wedding coverage, or you were going to act like someone with a life and ignore it completely. The Chaser’s coverage, despite this week’s massive publicity blitz, was always going to be of minimal interest to the masses.

That’s not to say The Chaser’s take wouldn’t have been a laugh. Without doubt, it would have been an amusing enough diversion from the obsessive fussing over the length of the bride’s train, Beckham’s wedding hairdo and other minutiae. But there’s no way it would’ve been must-see TV, and there’s a very simple reason why.



The Chaser has jumped the shark, as all comedy eventually does. Scooby Doo jumped it when writers introduced Scrappy Doo in 1980, The Simpsons jumped it with their crappy 2007 movie, and of course Happy Days jumped it in the infamous Fonzie-jumps-the-shark episode, which spawned the above-mentioned phrase.

Has all this royal wedding talk made you think about Princess Diana? I know she was much-derided when she was alive – what with the nutty psychics, playing the paparazzi and preying on other women’s partners. But, come April 29, there’s going to be an empty seat at Westminster Abbey and, sappy as it sounds, I know that will make me sad.



Diana would have been 50 this year – a fabulous age to watch your first-born son marry the woman he loves. You can speculate all you like on how she might have stolen the show, but she was nothing if not an instinctive and affectionate mother. 

What was fascinating about Diana was that both her life and death provoked a visceral response – not an intellectual one. Occasionally her actions made us think (her charity work for AIDS/landmines) but, more often, she made us feel. Struggling with the same problems as the rest of us – men, parenting, body image – she was like Julia Roberts’ character in Notting Hill: “I’m also just a girl standing in front of a boy, asking him to love her.”



I was 12 when Diana married her prince and I watched it on the telly with my mum. I loved the way she stuffed up Charles’ name, how the dress creased ridiculously and how she obviously adored her husband.

Later, working for a newspaper in London, I met her a few times and, like most, I was bedazzled. Her luminosity transcended modern celebrity, but her coquettishness could reduce hardened male hacks to giggling schoolgirls. Never mind the fancy palace, the title or the jewels, I’d always come away wishing I had her legs. They were solid-gold gorgeous.

Not much silences a newsroom, but the Sunday she died was eerily quiet as we typed words that felt inadequate, and deliberated over the single image that would form the front page and somehow capture her life. Later that week, I slipped out of the office to the palace where piles of flowers, with their garish bows and servo wrapping, illustrated far better than political spin-doctoring that she was indeed the People’s Princess.

At times like this, you wonder what she might have become. In my crystal ball, I see her living in America, not with Dodi Fayed, but someone improbable, perhaps a playwright à la Marilyn, or a gifted doctor such as her beloved Hasnat Khan.

She’d be godmother to Elton John’s bub and she’d have done away with that ghastly butler and replaced him with someone like Chris Colfer’s character in Glee. Of course, she’d have had Botox and she’d be a yoga nut, but there’s no way she’d do a Demi and upstage the younger generation by wearing a mini-dress to a fashion show. 

Which brings us to Kate. I bet Diana would have adored her. Why? Because her son does. In these weeks before the wedding, it would be Diana, not Camilla, taking Kate to lunch and instructing her to eat. And keep it down. 

As former Vanity Fair editor Tina Brown points out in her definitive biography, The Diana Chronicles, “Diana grew up associating the camera with love” because taking photographs was the only way her father showed her affection.

Come the wedding, those lenses will be trained on her son and daughter-in-law. Not that Diana would have minded, because – even for a princess – there’s no pride greater than that which you feel for your child.  

Wanna chance to get to the royal wedding? Check out www.news.com.au/aussieenvoy for for the News Ltd competition




There is a distinct time and place when The Chaser jumped the Shark and no, it wasn’t the Make a Realistic Wish sketch, tacky as that was. The real crime of that sketch was to forget a basic rule of comedy: if you’re going to satirise something, make sure it deserves it. But otherwise, the outcry was over the top. Comedians have to try and crash through boundaries, and inevitably that means sometimes they’ll just crash. Full marks for trying.

No, the day The Chaser really jumped the shark was at APEC, in Sydney in 2007. This, of course, was their greatest moment, a ballsy comedic triumph that went global. It was the prankster gags of university revues, which these guys have peddled for 20 years, writ large to a global audience.

Another way of saying that would be: Ha ha. You outwitted a bunch of cops and made fun of Canadians. Take a ticket and join the queue.

The irony is that The Chaser’s best humour has never been big target. Small embarrassing situations, and the foibles of everyday life, are the fertile turf where their humour took root, and it’s still what they do best. Remember the sketch where they took the piss out of the restaurant serenade? It’s a corny situation we’ve all experienced, and their take was hilarious. Heh heh, Andrew Lloyd Webber on a kazoo.

The Chaser would do well to remember their roots as a small satirical newspaper, moulded on America’s The Onion. The Onion also does the big target stuff. Today they have live stories on both Obama and Trump. But The Onion is always at is funniest when reporting tiny snippets of normal life as mock news. This piece on a man coughing on the toilet is 11 years old, and is just one small paragraph, but it still cracks me up. Heh heh, I said crack.

The Chaser still does the small stuff well. Always has. It also does national issues well. The Surprise Spruiker’s hilarious and gutsy “mufti madness” sale outside Sheik Al-Hilali’s mosque is still an all-time classic.

But the minute these dudes decided they’d take over the world, it became about them, not the humour. It became about the stunts, about the bigness of what they are doing, rather than the sheer funniness of it. Humour doesn’t work that way. Mind you, I just made a toilet joke two paragraphs back, so what would I know about humour?

Meanwhile, the humble taxpayer is now entitled to ask whether it was worth the risk. The Punch put that question to ABC TV boss Kim Dalton just then and he gave us a resounding “yes”, although obviously, everyone’s contract will be paid out, coverage or no coverage.

Dalton says The Chaser had been working on scripts and development for the royal wedding project for six to weight weeks before the rug was pulled this week. And he says they were totally justified  going ahead, as the ABC had it in writing that no restrictions would be placed on their coverage.

Indeed, the only contractual restrictions on anyone’s take on the event were supposed to be related to sponsorship and advertising issues, which obviously would not affect the ABC.

That all changed last week, Dalton says, when publicity about The Chaser’s coverage started hotting up. Suddenly, The Palace decided there would be no comedic or satirical treatment of the event. Nice to know our constitutional overlords respect our freedoms down here in the colonies, isn’t it?

Anyway, The Chaser won’t be working on Friday night, or whenever the wedding is. Perhaps they’ll use the free time to go out and film something really funny.


