Prince William’s coming visit seems to have resulted in the dramatic conversion of a republican celebrity. This is none other than the editor and media personality Ms. Ita Clare Buttrose AO OBE, who campaigned for the politicians’ republic during the 1999 referendum. 



Readers of the Wentworth Courier, which circulates in Sydney’s Eastern Suburbs, were surprised then by her harsh dismissal of the No case and indeed of constitutional monarchists. 

Ms Buttrose was the founding editor of Cleo which, with its nude male centrefolds, was aimed at young single women. She later edited the more conservative Australian Women’s Weekly and the Daily and Sunday Telegraphs. 

In 2009, the Friends of the National Library offered a dinner to honour her impressive achievements in the world of publishing and journalism. 

She was chosen by Channel 9 to present its broadcast of the wedding of Prince Charles to Diana, Princess of Wales. Ms. Buttrose delivered her lines regally seated in a carriage. Hence Australians were somewhat surprised when she later declared her staunch republicanism.

Has all this royal wedding talk made you think about Princess Diana? I know she was much-derided when she was alive – what with the nutty psychics, playing the paparazzi and preying on other women’s partners. But, come April 29, there’s going to be an empty seat at Westminster Abbey and, sappy as it sounds, I know that will make me sad.



Diana would have been 50 this year – a fabulous age to watch your first-born son marry the woman he loves. You can speculate all you like on how she might have stolen the show, but she was nothing if not an instinctive and affectionate mother. 

What was fascinating about Diana was that both her life and death provoked a visceral response – not an intellectual one. Occasionally her actions made us think (her charity work for AIDS/landmines) but, more often, she made us feel. Struggling with the same problems as the rest of us – men, parenting, body image – she was like Julia Roberts’ character in Notting Hill: “I’m also just a girl standing in front of a boy, asking him to love her.”



I was 12 when Diana married her prince and I watched it on the telly with my mum. I loved the way she stuffed up Charles’ name, how the dress creased ridiculously and how she obviously adored her husband.

Later, working for a newspaper in London, I met her a few times and, like most, I was bedazzled. Her luminosity transcended modern celebrity, but her coquettishness could reduce hardened male hacks to giggling schoolgirls. Never mind the fancy palace, the title or the jewels, I’d always come away wishing I had her legs. They were solid-gold gorgeous.

Not much silences a newsroom, but the Sunday she died was eerily quiet as we typed words that felt inadequate, and deliberated over the single image that would form the front page and somehow capture her life. Later that week, I slipped out of the office to the palace where piles of flowers, with their garish bows and servo wrapping, illustrated far better than political spin-doctoring that she was indeed the People’s Princess.

At times like this, you wonder what she might have become. In my crystal ball, I see her living in America, not with Dodi Fayed, but someone improbable, perhaps a playwright à la Marilyn, or a gifted doctor such as her beloved Hasnat Khan.

She’d be godmother to Elton John’s bub and she’d have done away with that ghastly butler and replaced him with someone like Chris Colfer’s character in Glee. Of course, she’d have had Botox and she’d be a yoga nut, but there’s no way she’d do a Demi and upstage the younger generation by wearing a mini-dress to a fashion show. 

Which brings us to Kate. I bet Diana would have adored her. Why? Because her son does. In these weeks before the wedding, it would be Diana, not Camilla, taking Kate to lunch and instructing her to eat. And keep it down. 

As former Vanity Fair editor Tina Brown points out in her definitive biography, The Diana Chronicles, “Diana grew up associating the camera with love” because taking photographs was the only way her father showed her affection.

Come the wedding, those lenses will be trained on her son and daughter-in-law. Not that Diana would have minded, because – even for a princess – there’s no pride greater than that which you feel for your child.  

Wanna chance to get to the royal wedding? Check out www.news.com.au/aussieenvoy for for the News Ltd competition




But there will be immense sadness today in the diminished Australian republican camp, which long ago lost its celebrity appeal and called off the candlelit dinners in five star hotels. How different it was at the 1998 Constitutional Convention when the republican leaders were holed up in the five star Hyatt Hotel, and ACM was out in the suburbs in a comfortable motel - with the rank and file.

In any event, by her enthusiastic endorsement of Prince William on Channel 9 on Friday 15 January, it seems that Ms. Buttrose has come back to the monarchy.

Welcome back, Ita. Perhaps you will be presenting the next royal wedding from your carriage.

As a royalist again, Ms. Buttrose could have a word to Telegraph journalist, the aristocratically named Sarrah Le Marquand.  

Ms. Le Marquand’s republican piece “Time to talk republic long overdue” was prominently published in Sydney’s Daily Telegraph (16/1) just on the eve of Prince William’s visit.   

Ms. Le Marquand should be politely advised that it is wise to know your subject before writing on it. Calling for an immediate end to what is after all our crowned republic, she claims “we don’t need to continue picking up the tab for the lavish lifestyle of the Windsor family to enjoy the occasional spectacle of a royal wedding”.  

First we pay nothing for the Windsor Family’s life style which, on the whole, is pretty abstemious. In any event, the Royal Family pays for itself, the Crown Estate more than covering funds provided by the British Government not as salaries but to cover expenses properly incurred.  This also covers the running costs of The Queen of Australia, for which, Ms Marquand, we pay nothing. 

There is another factor which trumps the predicable republican whingeing over the costs of a visit being paid mainly by The Queen. Tourism returns for a Royal Visit are substantial – Australia gets worldwide attention at this time, and unlike tourism advertisements, it is free.

Tourism Australia spent about $100 million on tourism promotion last year and we earned about $25 billion.  Professor Noel Cox from Monarchy New Zealand points out  a single full page advertisement in The Times in London is expensive – A$ 45,000. The Prince‘s forthcoming visit is already getting British and worldwide media attention even before he arrives. And this is free. We and New Zealand will do very well out of Prince William who is fitting this in while on leave from the armed forces.

“If we were going to pay for this kind of advertisement, it would cost a fortune,” says Professor Cox. “No matter how you look at this, it’s good news for New Zealand. Bringing Prince William here will put New Zealand in front of millions of readers, viewers, and listeners all over the world. Some of them are going to follow in his footsteps.”

What is the betting Prince William’s visit will be more effective in bringing in tourists than say, the  “Where the bloody hell are you?” campaign.

And as for “picking up the tab”, when are we going to stop diverting money from schools hospital and water into the endless votes , inquiries, reports, investigations, and the creeping republicanism – the attempts to hide and change royal symbols in contempt of the 1999 vote.

At great cost to the taxpayer the republicans were given a free hand to choose their best model. But the people rejected that nationally, in all states and in 72 per cent of electorates.

What Ms Marquand fails to explain are:

(a) just what precisely is wrong with one of the world’s most successful constitutions,

(b) how she proposes that should be remedied,

(c) what new flag she is proposing and

(d) how much this will cost.

She should check her facts and put some thought into these preliminary matters before she bursts into print on something for which she is manifestly unprepared.  

- David Flint is National Convenor of Australians for Constitutional Monarchy, and an emeritus professor of law


