It really has been a massive week. AFL Broadcast Rights were announced, there was a Royal Wedding, Logies, and then there was that Osama business.

This week Dan and Dennis take a look at:

•The AFL Broadcast Rights announcement

•The Chasers Royal Wedding commentary has the kybosh put on it by Clarence House

•Dieter Brummer getting tired and emotional post-Logies.

•What needs to be done to spruce up the Logie Awards and make them, heaven forbid, watchable.

The Logie improvement discussion stems from this article that Dan wrote on the topic for Crikey. Also, for fans of regular panelist Simon, he will be back in a couple of weeks. Uni commitments are keeping him from podcasting for a while.

As always, we look forward to receiving your mail and check us out on the Twitter / Facebook. You can also find the podcast on iTunes (please leave us a review, it helps people find the show).

The show can be downloaded / listened to HERE.


By now many of you will be royally sick of marriage talk - and it hasn’t even been consummated yet (ahem). But it’s still going to dominate the whole day… and the next, and the next, so we thought we’d give you this space to indulge or vent, as you see fit. Are you excited or nauseated? Bored? Pissed off at the Chaser ban?



Here’s a thought for all you Royal Wedding pundits out there; the only surprising thing about today’s big event is just how much the world collectively knows about it. Without even trying it’s possible to evaluate Prince Harry’s post-wedding-party breakfast menu and tell you why the bride’s sister, Pippa, has strung disco balls around the throne room. 

Or how much the plonk they’re serving at the reception goes for in the aisles at British supermarket Tescos and why Kate’s honeymoon clothes are more than just a bit ordinary for a future Queen.



As anyone who’s ever organised a wedding will tell you – that’s way too much time invested in something we’re not going to anyway. 

That being said, there are a few things worth contemplating (aside from what the heck we’ll do with all this information once it’s over). 

So here’s a Punch guide to surviving today. If none of our ideas grab you, add your own below.  

Option one: Take the “if you can’t beat them, join them” approach and get your glad rags on. News.com.au is running a live blog full of all the action throughout the day. We’re also betting you’ll find heaps of action at the wedding wonderlands on your local News Ltd masthead - just add /royalwedding after the URL. Twitter-types can also keep on top of the fanfare by following #royalwedding and @Queen_UK is a very amusing follow (thanks to @latrioli for that one).

Option two: Have a flick through our Punch coverage of the lead-up to Kate and Will’s big day. It’s really stirred the republican vs monarchy pot over the past few days. You might also like to reflect on some of the more amusing things you guys have said about the wedding over the past few weeks. Here’s just a few of our favourites



Scumbag says: So, does this mean one can’t find a thick shrub around the back, to go and have a piss? And what about the gents, can they do the same?

Rosie says: Royal weddings bring nothing but a feel good factor to the millions where in a few hours we can ditch all our worries for sheer bliss watching the ceremoniousness pomp only the British can display.

Zoe says: So what, it’s a bit of happy news amongst all the natural disasters, murders, drunken violence etc. I dont get right into it, but like a lot of people I wish them - and every other couple getting married - all the best. 

Bruce says: If the USA could buy the royal family, they would do it tomorrow. Lots of revenue to be made.

Cam says: Wouldn’t swap places with them .... yeah it’s tacky, yeah it’s over the top, yeah they are spoilt, but they are human beings with feelings.

Acotrel says: The only reason I have more than a passing interest in the royals these days, is that Diana’s kids seem to have some nous.  It still irks me when the media play their publicity generating game with these .........s!





Option three: Make a Royal Wedding inspired trifle. Or watch Guardian columnist, Charlie Brooker’s take on today.  

Option four: Turn off the television, the radio and switch off the internet and come back to earth in approximately seven to eight hours. It should be done by then. Maybe.

And now, some thoughts from the Punch community:

Michael McGuire, writer for SA Weekend magazine, says it’s just the wedding of a helicopter pilot and an unemployed woman: 

Welcome to the year 1450 and the return of the crime of Lese Majeste. Anyone ridiculing the person of the monarchy is to be locked up in the Tower of London.

It’s good to be living under an absolute monarch again. It does away with such messy institutions as democracy and parliament.

As for freedom of speech, it’s yet to be invented.

So the son of our Glorious Head of State has decreed that no one will poke fun at the nuptials of his little boy William to common old Kate on Friday. 

The Chaser has been ripped off the schedule on Friday night by a chastened ABC as no one is allowed to puncture the hot air balloon of self-importance that is the royal family.

Apparently if the Chaser was allowed to proceed the BBC would yank the coverage from its little Australian cousin. This is because the footage of the wedding is not allowed to be used “in any drama, comedy, satirical or similar entertainment program or content”. The order came from Clarence House, the official home of Charles, the next person in line to be Australia’s head of state. 

I am sure his bald noggin will look lovely on all our coins sometime soon. His views on what is acceptable television will be just as welcome.

It’s a truly incredible decree. You would be mortally offended if it wasn’t so downright laughable and illustrative of just how precious the Windsors are in their little make-believe world. If there was ever an event that was crying out for a few barbs and laughs it is this overblown marriage of a helicopter pilot to an unemployed woman.

Maybe the ABC should have got Adam Hills to do it. A man that dull could never offend anyone.

The Windsors are only happy for obsequious, fawning coverage. They should be pretty pleased so far. Nothing has been covered with such sugar since Charles and Diana married in 1981.

As the inhabitants of the world’s most lucrative work-for-the-dole scheme you would think the Windsors would be a little more forgiving of the ordinary person who pays their wages. Let them laugh a little and enjoy themselves. 

Or perhaps not. It was impressive this week to see William ask that his new bride be given a couple of years off work so she can adjust to the demands of being suddenly royal.

Although a couple of years doing not much at all is probably the best way to prepare for royal life.

Anyway, surely the Chaser chaps taking some easy pot shots at toffs in tails and a host of B-grade celebrities in over-tailored clothing is a lot less offensive that inviting the despots from Bahrain and Swaziland to the wedding feast.

It certainly has to be less offensive than spending $800,000 just on flowers for the happy event.

Rick Holden, Herald and Weekly Times subeditor, says if you’re looking for him, he’ll be in his shed:

When I was a pup, my mother would tuck this ex-pat Pom tightly into bed and regale me with stories of kings, queens and handsome princes who would sweep winsome damsels off their feet and whisk them away on horseback.

Then, as I grew into my pimply teens, I’m somewhat embarrassed to admit, I was one of that supposed global audience of 750 million who marvelled as a beautiful Lady Di - saviour of the Royal Family -  mucked up her vows and said “I do” to a gawky Phillip Charles Arthur George, never caring much that his name is actually Charles Phillip Arthur George.

That high-rotation gormless single by Men of Harlech, “Charlie’s Getting Married At Last”, embedded itself in my subconscious - and like some nefarious virus which you never quite cure, occasionally torments me to this day.

Five years later, when  eternal playboy Randy Andy, a bloke who had been dating a soft-core porn star named Koo Stark, hitched himself to a fiery redhead named Fergie - the next saviour of the British monarchy - I remembered with a shudder that immense 1981 snore-fest and retreated to the shed to rebuild my dirt-bike. 

I was secure in the knowledge that for the next six months there would be endless pucker commentary on the length of her train, the girth of her hips and the efficacy of her seamstress. 

And now there’s Wills and Kate, a love story that is apparently like no other. Yep, you guessed it; it’s a handsome prince and the beautiful commoner.

In this social-media era of faux celebrity, when women’s magazines salivate over every act of royal flatulence, surely today’s nuptials must be the most gratuitous example of public waste in decades?

For the equivalent of a reported $34 million, a young man born to privilege into one of the most socially dysfunctional families of the modern era gets to save the Royal Family - all over again.

Never mind that in Britain about 1.6 million people can’t find work, so long as Kate’s dress is hand stitched by a reputable designer.

Would anything encourage me watch two irrelevant individuals detached from the realities of modern society walk down the aisle? 

Perhaps the politically correct Wills could scandalise Westminster Abbey and sport a Jewish Yarmulke to cover his receding thatch. 

Or Katie, in a show of solidarity for multicultural Britain’s Muslim sisterhood could ditch the likely 6m of tulle for a top-to-toe abaya. 

Now THAT would give the women’s magazines something to tut-tut about. 

If that happens, then you have permission to drag me out of the shed

Robert Todd, lawyer and fighter for press freedom, says satire is a crucial weapon of the powerless:

It’s not often you get a glimpse of the values of Royalty, the BBC and possibly the ABC - all of whom let one of our presumed freedoms be trampled under Kate Middleton’s unsuspecting feet.  

The ease and apparent lack of anguish with which they all accepted censorship was appropriate for a Royal Wedding is breathtaking.  Julian Morrow the executive producer of the Chaser described the ABC as being gracious under fire.   

I trust you had your tongue in your cheek, Julian.  

Of course the ABC was given no choice to “lose the clowns or lose the wedding” - they were no doubt conscious of the backlash they would have suffered from viewers wanting Aunty’s pure view of the wedding, and like any dutiful subject and public broadcaster complied. 

It’s clear the ABC has been unfairly singled out in this situation because it has an obligation to broadcast important events to all sectors of Australian society - an obligation it takes very seriously. The BBC has overlooked the other obviously satirical elements of the commercial broadcasts - one can only wonder why they have not been threatened in the same way. From my viewpoint it appears to have exploited the situation the ABC would find itself in as a public broadcaster. 

Royal weddings have generated some interesting legal reforms in the area of free speech. The Treason Act with its origins in 1351 listed many forms of treason: Compassed or imagined the death of the King; levying war against the King in his realm and Adhering to the King’s enemies. Slaying the Treasurer, Chancellor or Judges while sitting in Court were frowned upon in the Act. It extended high treason to those who violated the King’s companion, the King’s eldest daughter if she was unmarried or the wife of the King’s eldest son and heir (they must have been interesting times).  

The Act even contemplated the possibility of a Chaser style attack on the Royal person:

And because that many other like Cases of Treason may happen in Time to come, which a Man cannot think nor declare at this present Time; it is accorded, That if any other Case, supposed Treason, which is not above specified, doth happen before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without any going to Judgement of the Treason till the Cause be shewed and declared before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or other Felony.

However the wide leeway granted to “the Justices” were not enough for Henry VIII (who was himself fond of a Royal wedding).  In 1534 the Succession to the Crown Act 1533, not content with declaring Princess Mary a bastard, required all subjects, if commanded, to swear an oath to recognize the King’s supremacy. 

It did not stop there; it also made it treason to act “by writing or imprinting” (this was the first time it was possible to commit treason by words alone) anything “to the peril of your most royal person….whereby your highness might be disturbed or interrupted of the crown of this realm the prejudice, slander, disturbance, or derogation of the said lawful matrimony solemnized between your majesty and the said Queen Anne (Anne Boleyn)”.  

The Act required a “minor” Royal amendment in 1536 when poor Anne Boleyn lost her head and the paternity of Henry’s children was revisited.  Under the Succession to the Crown: Marriage Act 1536 it then became high treason to say Henry’s marriages to Catherine and Anne were valid or the King’s marriage with Queen Jane was invalid.  

Of course there was a Third Act, but you get the drift. If the private expression of opinion could be treason presumably any critique of the choice of dress of the Royal bride might also have severe consequences.  

A mere hundred years later the House of Stuart used the Court of the Star Chamber to control opposition to Royal policy.  The Court of the Star Chamber under the influence of King Charles 1 banned newspapers in 1632 which were then printed in the Netherlands and smuggled into England.  

The sedition trials in the Court directly led to the Puritans fleeing England to New England.  The memory of its excesses led to the inclusion of the first and fifth amendments to the US Constitution.  One wonders how much of this legal and historical precedent Clarence House had in mind when its intervention occurred.  

Freedom of speech is not merely a right (albeit one we stiffly refuse to enshrine in writing), it’s a protection from the whims of the powerful.  Satire can render the powerful powerless.  It’s often the only way a common man can bring the powerful to a place where his voice can be heard.  

The Italian playwright Dario Fo observed “It is hard for power to enjoy or incorporate humour and satire in its system of control.”  

The prosecution of examiners of our social fabric - be they whimsical, satirical or otherwise - is an act of ultimate control. That’s why the apparent intervention of Clarence House with the enthusiastic support of the BBC should be disturbing.

This was a difficult case in which it was a hardship for ABC to be left without a remedy other than to abandon the broadcast in its entirety. 

However it appears to me the ABC or other broadcaster ought not easily agree to censorship of this kind.  A hardship, but perhaps one worth enduring.  Its judgement may have been distorted by the perceived importance of the Chaser against a momentous historical event (the wedding of our future King and Head of State).  

The Chaser program, with great respect to Julian and the team, is not that important a point conceded by them as they withdrew but principles are not judged by not by reason of their importance but because they speak of some overwhelming social or moral imperative.  Such principles apply to a “King to be”, his son or his Australian subject.  

We abandon them at great cost.




