Britain’s Royal Family is now officially a very old, very profitable freak show.



The proof lies in the sheer scale of outrageous memorabilia being flogged by even the most respectable of merchants and the simply silly stories making news in the lead-up to the royal nuptials.

They’re certainly a cute couple, and through a long tawdry process of elimination William and Kate actually seem fairly functional for royal folk. But is anyone taking this circus seriously – other than an opportunity to seriously cash in?


Has all this royal wedding talk made you think about Princess Diana? I know she was much-derided when she was alive – what with the nutty psychics, playing the paparazzi and preying on other women’s partners. But, come April 29, there’s going to be an empty seat at Westminster Abbey and, sappy as it sounds, I know that will make me sad.



Diana would have been 50 this year – a fabulous age to watch your first-born son marry the woman he loves. You can speculate all you like on how she might have stolen the show, but she was nothing if not an instinctive and affectionate mother. 

What was fascinating about Diana was that both her life and death provoked a visceral response – not an intellectual one. Occasionally her actions made us think (her charity work for AIDS/landmines) but, more often, she made us feel. Struggling with the same problems as the rest of us – men, parenting, body image – she was like Julia Roberts’ character in Notting Hill: “I’m also just a girl standing in front of a boy, asking him to love her.”



I was 12 when Diana married her prince and I watched it on the telly with my mum. I loved the way she stuffed up Charles’ name, how the dress creased ridiculously and how she obviously adored her husband.

Later, working for a newspaper in London, I met her a few times and, like most, I was bedazzled. Her luminosity transcended modern celebrity, but her coquettishness could reduce hardened male hacks to giggling schoolgirls. Never mind the fancy palace, the title or the jewels, I’d always come away wishing I had her legs. They were solid-gold gorgeous.

Not much silences a newsroom, but the Sunday she died was eerily quiet as we typed words that felt inadequate, and deliberated over the single image that would form the front page and somehow capture her life. Later that week, I slipped out of the office to the palace where piles of flowers, with their garish bows and servo wrapping, illustrated far better than political spin-doctoring that she was indeed the People’s Princess.

At times like this, you wonder what she might have become. In my crystal ball, I see her living in America, not with Dodi Fayed, but someone improbable, perhaps a playwright à la Marilyn, or a gifted doctor such as her beloved Hasnat Khan.

She’d be godmother to Elton John’s bub and she’d have done away with that ghastly butler and replaced him with someone like Chris Colfer’s character in Glee. Of course, she’d have had Botox and she’d be a yoga nut, but there’s no way she’d do a Demi and upstage the younger generation by wearing a mini-dress to a fashion show. 

Which brings us to Kate. I bet Diana would have adored her. Why? Because her son does. In these weeks before the wedding, it would be Diana, not Camilla, taking Kate to lunch and instructing her to eat. And keep it down. 

As former Vanity Fair editor Tina Brown points out in her definitive biography, The Diana Chronicles, “Diana grew up associating the camera with love” because taking photographs was the only way her father showed her affection.

Come the wedding, those lenses will be trained on her son and daughter-in-law. Not that Diana would have minded, because – even for a princess – there’s no pride greater than that which you feel for your child.  

Wanna chance to get to the royal wedding? Check out www.news.com.au/aussieenvoy for for the News Ltd competition



In the UK you can now buy a 1.75m life-size likeness of Kate and Wills on a fridge emblazoned with the couple’s official engagement photo. As General Electric’s distributor in the UK says: “Commemorative tea towels are so 1981.” 

London’s National Gallery, which since the early 1800s has housed one of the world’s greatest collections of Western European paintings, is selling a Knit your own royal wedding book, complete with little knitted dolls of Kate and Wills, Charles and Camilla and even the corgis. (Actually, I think I might order one of those.)

You can buy Wills and Kate Pez dispensers, Wills and Kate nail transfers (imagine their beaming mini faces on all 10 fingers!)  Kiss me Kate beer, mobile phones, mobile phone apps, USB sticks, even a new Little Miss Princess from Mr Men books.

There are the failsafe shortbread biscuit tins, the tea towels, the mugs and the plates. And for safe sex, there are commemorative condoms. “Combining the strength of a Prince with the yielding sensitivity of a Princess-to-be, Crown Jewels condoms promise a royal union of pleasure. Truly a King amongst Condoms.” 

Now that’s a sales pitch – and quite apt given the company run by Kate’s own parents has been selling hen’s night accessories including pillows which read “one last fling before the ring”. (And how very odd that Michael and Carole Middleton only met the Queen for the first time last week?)

In a former life I spent six weeks at a seedy freelance news agency in London, knocking on the door of B-list celebrities to ask if they still loved their unfaithful wives and chasing pathetic animal yarns like ‘Terry the turtle lost down the loo’. Our B-list ideas would then be sold to the major newspapers.

So it’s with some sympathy that I’ve read the wacky news stories most likely generated by underpaid, eager reporters ordered to find something (anything) to feed the hunger for royal news ahead of April 29.

There was that one about the young Somerset accountant who discovered an image of Kate’s face on a yellow mango-flavoured jelly bean.  “She was literally lying there staring back at me,” gasped sweet-tooth Wesley, who (surprise, surprise) is auctioning his now famous bean on eBay.

Could the wedding be out of this world? Totally plausible, according to Major George Filer who runs the National UFO Centre in the US and told The Sun that alien craft are often spotted during big national events. 

And of course there’s the roll call of Kate’s rellies dragged out from obscurity, from her burlesque dancing cousin Katrina who performs God Save the Queen in nipple tassels and g-string, to her tattoo-toting uncle Gary who once offered cocaine and high-class prostitutes to undercover reporters. 

Peek back into history and this royal show has always been rather freakish. Thankfully, their highnesses now yield little power in the political sense, have lots to give in a charitable sense and regularly keep us amused with their lack of common sense.

Friday’s wedding will be exactly what it should be to a country that should be a republic: light entertainment.

And if life is too short for another second of this right royal circus, can I suggest the “Thanks for the free day off: 4-day bender” plate, the “I’m not a royal wedding mug” mug or my personal favourite – the commemorative “Throne Up” sick bag.


