Every time there’s a party, there is someone who misses out. 



As the attending list on the cruelly public Facebook event grows, so too does their rage.

The host, they decide, is either jealous, rude, or trying to sleep with their partner/sister/all of the above. The truth, however, is that quite often the poor, uninvited soul simply doesn’t bring anything to the table. They’re boring, lame, and have a tendency to break furniture and cry after two beers and a packet of Pringles.



The pukefest commonly known as Kate and Wills’ wedding has already triggered its fair share of manicured foot-stamping and cries of “But The Sun said we were friends”.

A common complaint has been that Buckingham Palace’s resident ancient Sorting Hat, Elizabeth II, has overlooked former PMs Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.

This, however, is easily explained. Gordon Brown wasn’t invited because he is one of the top five blandest people ever born (the Kardashians make up the other four places). 

Has all this royal wedding talk made you think about Princess Diana? I know she was much-derided when she was alive – what with the nutty psychics, playing the paparazzi and preying on other women’s partners. But, come April 29, there’s going to be an empty seat at Westminster Abbey and, sappy as it sounds, I know that will make me sad.



Diana would have been 50 this year – a fabulous age to watch your first-born son marry the woman he loves. You can speculate all you like on how she might have stolen the show, but she was nothing if not an instinctive and affectionate mother. 

What was fascinating about Diana was that both her life and death provoked a visceral response – not an intellectual one. Occasionally her actions made us think (her charity work for AIDS/landmines) but, more often, she made us feel. Struggling with the same problems as the rest of us – men, parenting, body image – she was like Julia Roberts’ character in Notting Hill: “I’m also just a girl standing in front of a boy, asking him to love her.”



I was 12 when Diana married her prince and I watched it on the telly with my mum. I loved the way she stuffed up Charles’ name, how the dress creased ridiculously and how she obviously adored her husband.

Later, working for a newspaper in London, I met her a few times and, like most, I was bedazzled. Her luminosity transcended modern celebrity, but her coquettishness could reduce hardened male hacks to giggling schoolgirls. Never mind the fancy palace, the title or the jewels, I’d always come away wishing I had her legs. They were solid-gold gorgeous.

Not much silences a newsroom, but the Sunday she died was eerily quiet as we typed words that felt inadequate, and deliberated over the single image that would form the front page and somehow capture her life. Later that week, I slipped out of the office to the palace where piles of flowers, with their garish bows and servo wrapping, illustrated far better than political spin-doctoring that she was indeed the People’s Princess.

At times like this, you wonder what she might have become. In my crystal ball, I see her living in America, not with Dodi Fayed, but someone improbable, perhaps a playwright à la Marilyn, or a gifted doctor such as her beloved Hasnat Khan.

She’d be godmother to Elton John’s bub and she’d have done away with that ghastly butler and replaced him with someone like Chris Colfer’s character in Glee. Of course, she’d have had Botox and she’d be a yoga nut, but there’s no way she’d do a Demi and upstage the younger generation by wearing a mini-dress to a fashion show. 

Which brings us to Kate. I bet Diana would have adored her. Why? Because her son does. In these weeks before the wedding, it would be Diana, not Camilla, taking Kate to lunch and instructing her to eat. And keep it down. 

As former Vanity Fair editor Tina Brown points out in her definitive biography, The Diana Chronicles, “Diana grew up associating the camera with love” because taking photographs was the only way her father showed her affection.

Come the wedding, those lenses will be trained on her son and daughter-in-law. Not that Diana would have minded, because – even for a princess – there’s no pride greater than that which you feel for your child.  

Wanna chance to get to the royal wedding? Check out www.news.com.au/aussieenvoy for for the News Ltd competition




The man is to awesome party guests what gruel is to porridge.

Tony Blair’s invitation, on the other hand, reportedly accidentally went to Michael Sheen.

With careful planning and strict attention to detail, the royal wedding has the potential to be a timelessly elegant event worthy of eternal reproduction on $2.20 tea towels.

But that would be just a little bit crap.

Everybody knows that perfect weddings impress only two types of people – brides and those rare friends of brides who don’t want to see the whole event implode in a smoking pile of tears and fists.

The rest of us – including Prince Harry – want a Cirque du Soleil of ruined dresses, best man-punching and inappropriate sexual tension.

In order to transform Westminster Abbey into a cauldron of awesomeness, the monarchy must focus their efforts on creating a guest list that only includes cool people and/or celebrities going through entertaining breakdowns.

Kanye West, for instance, would make an excellent best man and would deliver the first wedding toast in history that fails to mention anyone but Kanye West, while making several vague references to sarcophagi.

Similarly, Charlie Sheen should also be invited. After all, that wedding cake isn’t going to vomit on itself.

Also, while not he’s not everyone’s cup of tea, Mel Gibson would perfectly play the role of the drunk, hideously inappropriate uncle who destroys entire conversations with 1930s-style racist statements and blatant misogyny.

It’s important, however, that we don’t stray too far from tradition.

Every modern couple has an obligation to contribute to the ruining of You Tube with a video of their awkward, Glee-inspired bridal waltz.

It’s all jazz hands and cartwheels these days, so who better to choreograph the royal two-step than Lady Gaga.

Kate could emerge from a giant fibreglass statue of a giant, tentacled corgi as William drinks orange juice and draws pentagrams while dressed as a cornflake.

NBA superstar and enormous human being Shaquille O’Neal would also make a fine guest.

Shaq could prove, once and for all, that athletic prowess, not fate, determines who catches an overpriced bunch of flowers and who gets a size 22 foot in the face.

Monarchists would argue that this would help the royal family remain relevant in 2011. 

At the very least, it’ll all make for a pretty cool tea towel.


