This guest post is a further update from Sue Stanton and her husband Abdelwahab on their travels through his home country of Tunisia and beyond.

 Sue is a long-time friend of mine from the Top End of the NT and is a a fiercely proud member of the Kungarakan & Gurindji peoples from the north of the NT. 

Report from North Africa No. 3, February 2010



I started writing this while sitting in the louage waiting to go to Djerba early Tuesday (19th) morning. We set the alarm for 5am and were at the louage depot by 6am while it was still nice and cold – around 14 degrees. I know some of you will say that is not really cold at all especially as it is ridiculously below a number of degrees at some places in northern Europe. At least it isn’t snowing here.

I might add that this cold morning has reminded me of  when we lived on the edge of Lake Illawarra at Primbee a few years back, the small wooden cottage with ill-fitting windows and rotting timber frames and doors that always still managed to let streams of very cold lake mist and spray circulate throughout the cottage were never enjoyable.  Neither is this exercise in what Abdelwahab insists we explore so as we can get a feel of a “real Tunisian experience”.



I notice locals don’t arrive at 6am, but start arriving closer to 8am when the sun has actually come up – still cold but not dark, when I think the cold seems to be unbearable. The “experience” is that the louage driver waits until he has the vehicle full – in this case at least 6 passengers…but he tries to squeeze in 8 – so far we only have 5. One seat or une place (French) or plassa (Arabic). Abdelwahab says we can offer to pay all the seats – a cost of approximately $20 each (Jerba route) – total $120-$160 and we can leave earlier. I have not been successful in convincing him this is what we should do.  The trip should take approximately 3 hours.

Louages are mini buses or shared taxis, and according to The Rough Guide to Tunisia: “Operating on fixed routes, and leaving when full, or when the driver gets tired of waiting, they are the fastest form places with the other passengers or pay for the last one yourself.”

Reminds me of some folk I know back in the NT – total lack of organisation and coordination…only worse! It seems to a moderately organised person like me that these folk too, just roll out of bed each day, no plans, no schedule, little preparation, lots of hope that everything will go well and there will be no setbacks or further delays – after all, it appears everything is in a mightier power’s hands. Or at least that is what I am told is the situation here in Tunisia. Don’t plan anything – just sit around waiting, and hoping. I used to think it funny when I heard exasperated West Australians telling me that WA translated into “wait awhile” – WA has got nothing on this place or this mobs’ attitude to ‘wait and hope’, ‘wait and see’…just wait! Yeah I know I should know all about “blackfella time/Indian time…Arab time.”

Yeay, we finally left the louage depot at 9.05am – with 7 passengers – no wait, we have stopped at the corner of the street out of town to pick up number 8. This is worse than a Qantas flight from Los Angeles to Sydney or Darwin to Perth – packed in like sardines. A female beggar took this stop opportunity to ask for donations from passengers – I think she did alright…well, I guess no one who has to beg for money is doing alright at all!

After one “cigarette stop” at a place it seems with no name we arrived at Jorf, the ferry terminal at what I have heard described as “the causeway” – right at the southern end of the Gulf of Gabes within the enclosed smaller Gulf of Bou Grara – both sheltered from the Mediterranean Sea. Here we were ready to cross to Isle de Jerba but not until after a good hour’s wait in a long traffic jam. After our crossing, accompanied by small trucks carting livestock and utes packed with a variety of fresh produce, holidaying Tunisians, locals and a small but diverse range of “foreigners” including me, we arrived at the port town of Ajim – the most important centre for sponges, which are still taken from the sea floor by divers – now mainly Tunisians, but originally Greeks and Maltese.

According to The Guide: The Mediterranean Sea is very rich in sponges and people around the Mediterranean have used then for centuries (the Romans as toilet paper). There are over five thousand species in the world; some gather on rocks like moss, while others are freestanding. Once thought to be a plant, a sponge is in fact one of the simplest forms of animal life; if part is broken off, it will become an independent animal. [Something I did not know].

Around the quay at Ajim you see numerous clay octopus traps – laid on the sea bed in the evenings. Octopus is a regular on the menu, especially along the coast. Not my idea of a good feed and besides I feel sorry for the poor little things. Once again, this place has a Star Wars connection as apparently the exotic and boisterous bar scene, well, the outside of it, is a house at Ajim, and up the road about 3 kms is Obiwan Kenobi’s house (an old mosque).

It was so beautiful to see water – BIG WATER again, and to smell it, to feel it, to know it…and I realised that I had not seen the ocean since the 29th…

Houmt Souk (main market place) is the main town and that is where we checked into El Machrek on Bourguiba Ave – and were very impressed since the Guide only rated it 2 stars. We had a nice balcony overlooking a busy street which we later discovered led to a location in a side alley where alcohol is sold – a sly grog dealer…not illegal, but being a Muslim country usually designated bars & sale of alcohol is a tourist/foreigner only activity, I’m told. Our other tour around Houmt Souk included nice dinner at a restaurant named Carthage (of course) past several mosques, markets (flogging the usual tourist items – soft toy camels, paperweight containing dead scorpions and horned viper (snakes) and desert lizards, tshirts, dates, scarves) – a bit different from the sarongs, digeridoos, clap sticks, shells, plastic crocodiles etc. etc. and usual items at the several Darwin markets – but all the same too.



Houmt Souk

We spent a pleasant evening walking around and dining at Houmt Souk except had a minor hiccup with my passport – being that my visa expired 30th December so my current Tunisian ID (visa) does not reflect my status – being married to a Tunisian or that I await for extension authorisation, carte de sejour – applied for 15 December, but could take up to 3 months, by which time I will probably be leaving the country anyway. Wait awhile country!

Houmt Souk and surrounds, Djerba – 20 January

According to The Rough Guide: Jerban society is quite distinct from that of mainland Tunisia. Its population forms a patchwork of different ethnic and religious groups – Arabs, Berbers and black Africans, Muslims (both Ibadite and Sunni) and Jews – who all differ slightly in their traditions, style of dress, the names they bear and the way they speak. However, all of them share a common Jerban identity: their traditions differ from those of the mainland as much as from each other.

We walked through the quite large Jewish community of Hara Kebira (Es Souani) where Abdelwahab met and spoke to an elderly Jewish man.  There are a number of old synagogues in this area, some no longer in use, some being renovated and many of the houses front entrance walls and doors are decorated with symbols in blue, to ward off the evil eye; as well as the usual fish and hands, some also include a five-armed version of the normally seven or nine-armed menorah (Jewish candelabra). (picture) This was an interesting walk, especially that both of us attracted attention, Abdelwahab being able to communicate in Arabic, but also being questioned about his origins.

Hara Sghira – synagogue of El Ghriba (the miracle)

The story goes that the original synagogue was built here as this is the place where a stone fell from heaven – amazingly an unknown woman arrived at exactly the same time and it was she who directed the construction of the synagogue. It is also believed that the synagogue’s silver key will be thrown back to heaven if ever the Jews leave Djerba. The current building’s history only dates back to 1920, the inside decorated with what some may describe as garish tiling and an inner sanctuary contains a number of manuscripts, including one of the oldest Torahs in the world. On Lag beOmer in May and 33 days after the beginning of Passover, Jewish pilgrims come from all over North Africa to El Ghriba.



Hara Sghira - synagogue of Al Ghriba 

The Jews of Djerba

Some believe that the Jews arrived in Djerba around 566 BC, following Nebuchadnezzar’s conquest of Jerusalem, but there are others who say they arrived after the taking of the city by Titus in 71 AD. The Jewish population today is quite small, around 1500, many who returned after emigrating to Israel. Historically they were/are artisans who have played an important role in the island’s commercial development and reputation. In the past they also established a number of communities over much of the south of mainland Tunisia but kept their links to Djerba.

According to The Rough Guide: To begin with Jews were tolerated, but only while they kept to their own community and traditional occupations. Under the French their position improved, but they remained second-class citizens relative to the Europeans and European Jews. Their own attitude helped maintain this position, for while other communities took advantage of the educational and financial resources of the world Jewish organizations, the Jews of Jerba rejected aid, preferring to keep their strict and distinctive form of Judaism. Consequently they won a reputation as intransigent traditionalists, gained far less from the Protectorate than other communities, and became the target of French and Arab anti-Semitism.

Jerban Jews were offered the opportunity to re-establish in the newly created state of Israel and many left Jerba in the 1950s and especially after Tunisian independence most left but then a number returned to Jerba and according to The Guide: Perhaps as a result of Bourguiba’s attempts to encourage integration, overt anti-Semitism is rare, and Jerban Jews generally have good relations with their Muslim neighbours.However, anti-Zionism (“we have nothing against Tunisian Jews; its only the State of Israel we object to”) still forms a pretext for occasional outbursts…

For those who keep up with international news, you will remember these events:

•1985 – a police officer, apparently incited by a radio broadcast from Libya, killed 3 worshippers at El Ghriba;

•2002 – a suicide bomber blew up a propane gas tanker, supposedly in support of Islamic fundamentalism – killed 20 people.

As The Guide states: The target was obviously chosen for its Jewish nature, but none of the victims was in fact Jewish – 18 were tourists from Germany and France, and the other 2 were Tunisian Muslims. Although the bomber was Tunisian, this was no home-grown attack: the perpetrator had been to Pakistan and probably Afghanistan, where he was given $20,000 to fund it by members of al Qaida…[responsibility] claimed by a group calling itself ”the Islamic Army for the Liberation of the Holy Sites…

El Ghriba is now heavily guarded by Tunisian military – we had to produce passports, although the plain clothes security did not even open them when he saw the Australian ID.

Not that we wanted to see skulls but we were a bit disappointed that our other site of interest, “the tower of skulls” is now only marked by an obelisk. Engravings and sketches of the old fort are held at Houmt Souk’s  fort, official names, Borj el  Kebir or Borj Ghazi Mustapha, originally occupied by the Romans, captured by king of Sicily, Roger de Lluria in 1284, added to by Hafsid sultan Abour Fars in 1432, and further added to by Ghaza Mustapha (Ottoman) whose tomb is here.



Borj el Kebir

Depending on how one rates historical events, it is written that the most significant moment took place in 1560, when Philip II of Spain’s armada was wiped out by Dragut’s Ottoman fleet and his men retreated into the fort, where they were massacred by the Turks. (Only reference to be found describes Dragut as a pirate). Various accounts number the Spanish skulls as from 500 to 5000, and the story goes that they were piled up in the tower until at least 1848 when the bey (Ottoman official) of the time was convinced by European officials they should be buried – this was done even though there was strong opposition to it. The men of Dragut’s fleet who died in the battle are commemorated in a mausoleum on Rue Taieb Mehiri in graves surmounted by stone turbans and Ottoman style.

After a delightful lunch of what I call “Arab hamburger”, they call them “sandwich” – round bread stuffed with grilled chicken, sausage or lamb, with salad (Tunisian style – finely chopped tomato/cucumber/onion with lemon juice), harissa, olives and chips, we headed to the louage depot – our next destination back on the mainland – Gabes.

The louage was full – 8 of us crammed into an even smaller van – no leg room, in fact no room at all. I was the only female on board. However, the queue to the ferry was long which meant we could walk around the port’s souk and take photos and enjoy the water again. I enjoyed watching the birdlife – the usual gulls and what I convinced myself were those diving birds I used to see at Lake Illawarra on the NSW south coast.

Next report from Gabes – This port was first occupied by the Phoenicians, then named by the Romans as Tacape. In medieval times it was a terminus for trans-Saharan caravans and North Africa’s main hajj caravan route carrying pilgrims to Mecca. Gabes was also well known for its silk – made by silkworms raised on mulberry bushes in the oasis. This region also experienced much WW II activity and I will cover some of that, especially what was known as the Mareth Line, in the next report.

From The Guide: In 1886, a French administrator arrived to take up a post at Gabes, the coastal town billed as the port of the Sahara. “Imagine my surprise”, he wrote to his superior, “when I had to disembark onto the beach and walk up the dusty path that is the main street to reach the only building, my office.”


