Love makes a marriage, even a Royal one. This is the simple and powerful message of the upcoming wedding of Prince William and Kate Middleton, one that’s relevant to Australia’s same-sex marriage debate. 



Once royal weddings were about dynastic alliances. That began to change in the twentieth century, but still there were limits on who a royal married, famously illustrated by the abdication of Edward VIII to marry a divorcee. 

As recently as the marriage of William’s father, Charles, to Lady Di, it was inconceivable that an heir to the throne would marry outside the aristocracy or have a relationship with his fiancé prior to the wedding.



Diana referred to Charles as “Sir” right up to their wedding day, highlighting the inequality in their relationship.

But now no-one raises an eyebrow at the fact that Kate Middleton is a “commoner”, that she and William have effectively been a de facto couple for several years, and that Kate will not vow to “obey” he husband.

Clearly, marriage is no longer about power, class or gender. 

Gone are the days when people felt they had to marry because of social pressure – the Windsors reminded us all of the problems that caused.

Today, marriage is all about love, and the commitment that flows from that love.

In fact, marriage is only considered appropriate if it is for love, and if it is between two people who know they are compatible enough to make their marriage last.

That’s not to say that marriage is somehow a fundamentally different institution to what it was fifty or a hundred years ago.

It’s still about the binding of two people before their family, friends and society. 

It still involves moving rituals, like the making of vows and the exchange of rings, that stretch back millennia. 

What the royal wedding shows is that marriage can adapt to changing social norms without losing its meaning. It can be both contemporary and traditional at the same time. 

For this reason, thousands of gay and lesbian Australians who watch the royal wedding will ask themselves “why can’t I marry too?”.

If marriage is about love, why does the law stop a loving couple of the same sex from marrying?

If marriage is no longer about social pressure, why is there still pressure on young gay people to marry people of the opposite sex if they want to fit in?

If marriage can adapt to the new without losing touch with tradition, why won’t the Government allow same-sex partners to exchange vows just like their parents and grandparents before them?

Like everyone else, many gay and lesbian Australians aspire to marry their own prince or princess and to embark on the adventure that is married life.

Why do politicians insist on standing in the way and blocking love’s path?  

My hope is that the great traditionalist, Julia Gillard, is prompted to ask herself these questions about the changing meaning of marriage when she is seated in Westminster Abbey next to her de facto partner as a guest of the royal couple.

But just in case the relevance of the royal wedding to the Australian same-sex marriage debate escapes her, openly-gay rugby player, Gareth Thomas, and openly-bisexual poet-laureate, Carol Ann Duffy, will be there to remind her, as will Sir Elton John and his husband, David Furnish. 

Yes, in 2011 even the Windsors recognise same-sex marriages.

It’s time Australia did too.


