This Easter the world seems full of believers. Religious and Royal. 



Tomorrow, billions will celebrate the resurrection of their King, Jesus Christ. But this year, there’s another King-to-be who’s stealing the limelight. 

Unless you’ve been hiding in a cave over the past few days (no offence, Jesus. Thank God for Mary Magdalene), you’d be well aware the wedding of the century is six sleeps away.

And with this wedding many hope there’ll be a resurrection of a different kind. The resurrection of the monarchy. There will be no heavy cross to carry. No rags. No bare feet. No beard. Quite the opposite. There will be carriages, horses with plaits, the Beckhams, trumpets and the world’s most celebrated modern couple – Prince William and Kate Middleton.



And in the same way the Bible’s Peter built his church on the rock of Christianity, England will rebuild the Monarchy on the rock of their marriage.

And (so far) they couldn’t ask for a more perfect couple. They make Elizabeth Bennett and Mr Darcy look like Charlie Sheen and Denise Richards.

For decades, republicans have argued that the Royals live in a bubble - and they’ve been right. There’s no doubt they represent the privileged elite. They have gold-plated banisters, paintings on their ceilings, staff light their fireplace before they arrive home and they don’t wear jeans in public. 

But Prince William and Kate Middleton are hoping to change a lot of that. Sure, they’re not doing renos and I think they’ll leave their jeans in Space Bags but they’re reaching out. There’s a feeling that they genuinely want to make a difference. And so far they’re making tracks. They’re even using Twitter to make official announcements. This young couple is pushing a stuffy old family into the thick of the 21st century. And the Royals need them like cricket needed Kerry Packer.

The New Testament says Easter Sunday is about “a new birth into a living hope through the resurrection …”. Now, Jesus had a pretty big job resurrecting from the dead. No question. Yikes. But he had God on side. God spoke to Him. God saved Him. If Prince William is hoping to snag the throne, he might want to do a shout-out to the Big Fella. Because no resurrection is easy. 

But the Prince will have his people behind him. Just like watching a groom give a ho-hum speech at his wedding, everyone – believers and non-believers – will get behind him. We’ll clap, whistle and pump him up because he deserves a crack. Because, republican or not, we all like to believe. Just like the doubters who, tomorrow, will still enjoy a chocolate egg.

So, let the King-to-be cometh. Raise him up. 

May the royal wedding do for the monarchy what Jesus did for Christianity. As the Union Jack flaps atop the Palace while the newlyweds have a little pash on the balcony, make a toast to the man who would be King, his bride, and the reinvention of the Royals.


