On Insiders on Sunday, Andrew Bolt warned that the green movement would try to ‘beat up’ the unfolding nuclear disaster in Japan and declared it a ‘political symbol’. As the news from the Fukushima nuclear complex has continued to worsen, Bolt has continued to run with the line that people’s fears are overblown:

This scaremongering over the crippled Fukushima nuclear complex is extraordinary. Already anti-nuclear activists, rebadged as nuclear “experts”, are out spreading terror.

Bolt seems to be arguing that the focus on the dangers of the nuclear reactors somehow means ignoring the thousands of people who have died in the earthquake and tsunami. Can’t we be expected to walk and chew gum at the same time? In the midst of Andrew chiding people for their fears about the nuclear situation what’s been going on elsewhere?



The  Volcanic Ash Advisory Centre this morning issued 10 nuclear emergency flight information regional advisories (FIRs) to enable airlines to route flights well clear of the hazard

Australian journalists are abandoning field coverage of the earthquake and tsunami devastation and flying out of Japan, as radiation fears from damaged nuclear reactors worsen.

Japan suspends work at stricken nuke plant due to surge in radiation

I certainly hope that Andrew’s prediction that the problems at the Fukushima reactors will not lead to deaths is correct, although the news that two workers are missing after an explosion is concerning, but I am baffled at how belligerent he has become in his coverage of this issue. Why in the midst of a disaster, where information is difficult to obtain, is Bolt so desperate to lay his credibility on the line to promote the nuclear power industry? 

Even if the reactors at Fukushima are brought under control without any loss of life, the long and expensive process of permanently decommissioning them is still one of the most potent arguments against the nuclear power industry, disaster or no. Is Andrew so determined to promote things that his perceived enemies of ‘the left’ dislike that he’ll put aside rational judgement to do so?

To describe the ongoing crisis in Japan as “ludicrous fear-mongering“ seems a little out of step. It’s worth remembering that disasters aren’t merely measured in terms of a body count, and while we mourn those who have lost their lives in Japan this past week, to diminish the potential problem that may arise from the damaged reactors as a green beat-up appears to be a serious failure of judgement.





Share and Enjoy:


