As feared yesterday’s earthquake and tsunami disaster in Japan is about much more than dislocated flights, as the dead are retrieved in their hundreds if not thousands from the wreckage strewn over wide low lying areas adjacent to the northern Pacific coastline of Honshu around Sendai.

The aftermath is also going nuclear, with two nuclear power plant emergencies declared in the Fukushima area as radioactive steam is released from each of the plants to lower temperatures in reactor cores where the emergency cooling system is variously reported as having failed or proven inadequate.

A short while ago (12.21 pm Australian eastern summer time) a Japanese broadcast was translated as saying that “the fail safe cooling system at the Fukushima No 2 reactor has failed.”

The possibility of a nuclear meltdown is now being acknowledged in passing in government statements, although it is officially considered a remote possibility. Unless the reactor cores are cooled promptly this remote possibility is a certainty,  a situation which can cause massive nuclear contamination of the air and surrounding areas.  The wording of statements from the Japanese government and the relevant power authorities has deteriorated notably in the last several hours, after a series of earlier reassuring statements that the nuclear power stations had been shut down as planned and without mishap according to earthquake procedures.

An exclusion zone of at least 10 kilometres has been imposed around two of the 11 reactors  that were automatically shut down when the magnitude 8.9 earthquake struck at 4.46 pm Australian eastern summer time on Friday.

These reactors, Fukushima No 1 and No 2,  are now the subject of nuclear emergency declarations which enable enforced evacuations if necessary and the control of all relevant public infrastructure and services as well as the controlled release of radioactive material from each installation.

While all of the official statements have not yet been reconciled with news reports, it was conceded earlier today that radioactive leaks may have occurred at one plant in the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, and that controlled releases of radioactively contaminated steam have been made or will shortly occur at either or both the plants covered by the emergency declarations. By the middle of today controlled releases of radioactive steam from both affected reactors had been reported by media in Japan.

All of which makes the disruption to flights that has occurred of exceedingly minor importance. For the record Narita Airport has reopened and Qantas is providing details on the resumption of flights including three delayed flights on Qantas.com.

Jetstar has today cancelled two Japan flights but says it expects to resume full services to Japan shortly including arrangements for the onward travel to Japan by passengers on two of its flights which yesterday diverted to Guam.


