Some parts of the environmental movement will be quietly high-fiving each other this week, as the nuclear industry’s progress over the past decade looks certain to take a massive step backwards.



They have been quick to proclaim ``I told you so’’ and make the fallacious analogy that the incidents in Japan mean that Australia and indeed all other countries should not consider nuclear as part of the energy mix.

Incidents which, it should be kept in mind, involved an unprecedently large earthquake and decades-old technology.



David Noonan from the Australian Conservation Foundation also made the comment that Australian uranium was used by the company that ran the Fukushima plants, hinting that we therefore bear some sort of moral culpability.

Naturally what Japan must do now, along with the rest of the world, is turn to the apparently abundant sources of renewable energy at its fingertips to replace the 24 per cent of its energy which comes from nuclear.

The problem is, excluding hydroelectric energy, Japan generates about 2 per cent of its energy from renewable sources according to the US Energy Information Administration. Hydro is just another 7 per cent.

The other 67 per cent is, you guessed it, generated by coal and gas. (Quite a lot of Australian coal and gas too, just in case you didn’t feel guilty enough about the uranium).

Unfortunately countries like Japan do not have the luxury of carpeting their plains with solar panels and their hilltops with windfarms like we do in Australia - at sub-economic prices without government assistance or a carbon price.

Many nations with large populations and rapidly growing energy needs are in the same boat.

Currently they pretty much have two options.

Coal, which is nice and cheap and highly polluting, or nuclear, which avoids most of the greenhouse gas pollution of the former, but as we know well and have seen vividly this week, has its own important and potentially devastating environmental threats.

The thing is, these threats have not changed since last week, and cannot be applied equally to all geological or political jurisdictions.

Advances are being made on the renewable energy front, but much work remains to be done in terms of the scale and economic viability of pretty much all of the renewable sectors.

On this week’s Q&A Prime Minister Julia Gillard pointed to renewables as a reason Australia would not go down the nuclear path.

``We are a country with abundant solar, wind, geothermal, tidal, you name it, we have got renewable source of energy, so we don’t think nuclear energy is right for this country,” she said.

If these sources are so abundant, we are not doing a great job of exploiting them. Just 303 petajoules of energy, out of the 5773 consumed in Australia in 2008-09 was generated by renewables according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics.

And less than a tenth of the overall renewable count came from solar and wind.

The reality is that internationally renewables are a long way from being able to provide economic baseload power and nuclear energy remains a viable and acceptable part of the energy mix.

It is entirely acceptable to revisit the operating and construction parameters within which the technology is used following the Fukushima incident, but to bury plans to continue nuclear developments, when there is no viable, greenhouse-friendly alternative, would be foolish and short-sighted.


