The Sydney Morning Herald’s Elizabeth Farrelly is having second thoughts about this whole democracy thing:

But democracy, the tyranny of the majority, may yet prove an own goal for humanity, mainly because of the weird trick it does with scale; allowing us all to pursue our own happiness as if we were the only ones on the planet. Allowing us to act like a vast family of solipsistic only children, steadfastly voting for lower taxes and higher services.

…

Maybe it’s too soon to dump democracy, but I’d make voting a privilege; not a right, and certainly not an obligation. If they can’t be bothered to vote, the last thing you want is their help in running the country. Rather, we’d earn our voting rights by demonstrating at least some intelligent grasp of the issues and so force, or perhaps allow, our leaders to raise their eye-cues.

Hmm, if only there was a way to hang on to democracy, and all the benefits of a liberal rights based society, while educating people about issues and thinking beyond self interest. I know, how about we commit to having a strong media that will inform the populace, educate them, and hold our political class to account? Nah, that’d never work.



Farrelly makes a good point that democracy is most effective when the participants are well informed, but seems to completely miss the fact that the biggest reason that we suffer from the curse of misinformation and skewed priorities is the ongoing failure of the industry that she’s a part of. It’s sometimes said that we get the governments that we deserve, but what did we do to deserve the broken oligopoly that presently controls the Australian media? How can we expect voters to look beyond their own self interest when every change in government policy is distilled to nothing more than winners and losers, or how many dollars a week it will cost the individual.

If Farrelly wants political leaders to stop pandering to the stupid and greedy, then how about she asks some of her colleagues to stop passing off fatuous pap as news? Where is Farrelly’s damnation of the commentators who happily spread misinformation in order to make a partisan point? Why does Farrelly assume that the best way to have an informed electorate is to exclude people rather than to educate them?

If Farrelly’s meritocratic model was implemented I wonder, given the systematic failure of our media, whether she and her colleagues would be given the right vote? Would the loss of having a say in her own future perhaps push Farrelly back into the tender embrace of Team Democracy?


