There’s a new line of attack on Barack Obama. Fox News has decided he should not be playing golf and it’s wrong of him to have taken part in the national March US obsession of entering the office NCAA tipping competition. And as for mucking around playing basketball – well! Here’s Sean Hannity:



HANNITY: … on Saturday, hours after the quake struck, he went golfing. And later that evening he attended a dinner with members of the mainstream Obama-mania media. And today, the president spent his afternoon filling out his NCAA brackets for ESPN.

Sadly, none of this is a joke. Here with analysis on all of this, Wall Street Journal’s Stephen Moore, former White House Press Secretary, Fox News contributor Dana Perino.

All right. So, he’s filling out brackets, he’s going to fundraisers, parties and golfing. And I’m thinking Libya, the Middle East, you know, Japan. I don’t — I don’t get it. …

Two weekends in a row with golf. The NCAA tournament picks, I’m sure they’re really important for ESPN, but maybe not at this particular time. Nuclear crisis, we’ve got tsunami warnings. We’ve got the potential people on the West Coast are scared to death that in fact, the winds may blow it into the West Coast of the United States of America.

DANA PERINO, FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: He probably feels like if he would succumb to all the pressure, to comment on everything, he wouldn’t have time even to go to the bathroom. But what surprises me is –

HANNITY: You mean he wouldn’t have time to shoot hoops?



It just makes you wonder what the current day conservative commentators would have said about Dwight D.Eisenhower. After his election as President in 1952, Eisenhower would visit the Augusta National course to play 29 times during his two terms. Yet he managed to steer the country through eight years of the Cold War.

When the criticism of President Obama turns to the trivial you have to think that it is slowly dawning on the maddies of the right that the man is going to be around for a second term afterall.


