This is a guest post from my good friend Sue Stanton who in May last year wrote about her concerns with recent events in the Northern Territory.

Sue and her husband Abdelwahab have now embarked on, apparently indefinite, trip around various places of interest to them both in far-off corners of the globe.

Currently they are visiting with Abdelwahab’s family in his home country of Tunisia.

Treading lightly : recollections and reactions – and some news

I have come to visit Gafsa, Tunisia.

Gafsa is in a phosphate rich region, yet extremely arid terrain that stretches from the outer region of the coastal town Gabes to the Algerian border. Some writers claim that once, parts of this region were covered in fertile forest.



Mosque at Gafsa

One claim is that Hannibal got his elephants from this once fertile area just a mere two thousand years ago – now it has been stripped of its forests, over-grazed by sheep, goats and camels, leaving it unproductive for agricultural purposes.

On a recent road trip to the capital Tunis, I was struck by how much the arid terrain, with the background mountain ranges reminded me, sometimes of parts of central Australia (take me back to the old MacDonnell Ranges), except the brilliant colours of the ranges were missing. Some parts reminded me of the southwest region of the USA, especially southwest Arizona, New Mexico,  and even northern Mexico.

The profusion of prickly pear cacti especially reminded me of my travels through areas south of Tucson, around Tombstone territory, through the Santa Catalinas, around places like San Xavier del Bac, right through Tohono O’Odham country.

According to Daniel Jacobs’ version of The Rough Guide to Tunisia the Edwardian traveller Norman Douglas (Fountains in the Sand, 1944) quoted from an old Arab song when he wrote of his impressions of Gafsa:

Gafsa is miserable; its water blood; its air poison; you may live there a hundred years without making a friend. 

Douglas added that during his sojourn the usual practice was to dine early in Gafsa, and after that, there was absolutely nothing to do.

But Douglas wrote of his observations in a now far distant time and many things have changed, and I would hope some things have changed even from the 1944 time-frame of his publication.

While I have no way of knowing why the old Arab song told of such negatives about the city, and at this stage I have only been resident for 3 short  weeks and I have not experienced any after evening meal social activity, I cannot agree or disagree about the misery of Gafsa.

However, I’m inclined to agree that there is not much to do after dinner but to watch boring BBC news and an English language Chinese cultural channel on the TV. Of course there are a couple of hundred Arab, Italian and some French channels – interesting, but all no good to me as far as information or entertainment goes as I cannot understand any of those languages – yet.

Gafsa, not unlike a number of Aboriginal towns I have travelled to in the Northern Territory, and some I have only heard and read about, especially since “the Intervention”,  seems sorely neglected by central government.

According to research I have done Gafsa’s history is one of the longest in the Maghreb, indeed in Tunisia. (Maghreb is the Arab term that describes “west” – for example of a region – also that includes areas or countries described as being part of the Western Sahara – Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco).

The name of Gafsa was changed from the original Capsa. The Romans were here around 107 BC and even then, according to the Roman historian Sallust (The Jugurthine War - described as a melodramatic  account by a Roman historian of the war between Numidian king Jugurtha and the Roman army under Marius):

…the whole district is desolate, uncultivated, waterless, infested by deadly serpents, which like all wild animals are made fiercer by scarcity of food, and especially by thirst, which exasperates their natural malignity.

So far, besides the capital Tunis, my husband Abdelwahab and I have travelled to Tamaghza (western spelling Tamerza), passing through a number of historic, yet otherwise  pretty unremarkable places such as Metlaoui, Redeyef, Moulares, all westward running parallel to the Algerian border. The stop at Tamaghza is less than 40 kms from the Algerian/Tunisian bordertown and mountain oasis of Mides.

We have not travelled into Algeria yet and DFAT has issued warnings to foreigner tourists re the threat of kidnap and general possible terrorist activity involving supposedly Al-Qaida operatives.

Tamaghza was a nice place to stop with a couple of waterfalls and oases. Abdelwahab, Memoun our driver and Afaf, another cousin had lunch at one of the sites used for episodes of the first (1977) Star Wars movie and a couple of sequels – The Phantom Menace (1999) and Attack of the Clones (2002). According to tourist guide information, Tunisia (several places, including Tozeur) represents the desert planet Tatooine, the home of Luke Skywalker, named after actual Tataouine.

Tataouine was supposedly founded by the French as a military base around 1890.



Tamaghza cascades

We took a side trip to a canyon, or cascades as named by locals. It was a pretty place deep in a gorge, recently devastated by flooding, causing major road and cliff damage, and loss of several lives.

Magnificent cliffs and terrain, not looking too stable as mostly consisting of sand and mud. A number of bazaars and a whole range of tourist guides and others in traditional and Berber-style dress waiting for unsuspecting tourists – could have been in Bali, or even at the Mindil markets in Darwin.

Our most recent trip was to Tozeur – and I was completely charmed by this place.



Mosque at Tozeur

The Tunisian national poet Kacem Chebbi (1909-1934), was a Tozeuin and his statue sits in prominence in mid-town Tozeur.

In his most famous poem The Will to Live he wrote:

If a people one day wish to live

Destiny has no choice but to respond;

The night will inevitably dissolve

And chains will irresistibly be broken.

On reading those lines I immediately thought of all the countrymen of the Northern Territory, indeed I thought of all colonised aboriginal/indigenous peoples the world over and felt a slight resurrection of hope.

We were typical tourists and went on the usual tourist roundabout by visiting Chak Wak, a walk through timeline commencing with a walking/talking with dinosaurs exhibition. Through human evolution to present day civilisation, with some impressive displays such as the animals boarding Noah’s Ark, Roman, Christian, Jewish and Muslim/Arab histories. The replicas of dinosaurs, historical displays with an oversized Hannibal, Eve in the Garden of Eden and other characters and symbols were quite impressive.

We were accompanied by Abdelwahab’s cousin Memoun as driver, nephews Zaharan and Esmael and niece Meriam.  Zaharan, lives in Tozeur and is presently going through the final process of his PhD dissertation in relation to the study of sheep production.

We had a pleasant lunch while enjoying the spectacle of guides and tourists demonstrating camel and horse riding skills. The camels here show such dignity with their very impressive finery and headgear – and even the guides who dress in a range of “traditional” garb look pretty good too.  Abdelwahab prepared our lunch of tuna and harissa on fresh bread rolls, with olives, of course.

I visited the kids museum with Esmael and Meriam, which included a couple of walks through very dark caves with mysterious lights and sounds meant to (frightfully) entertain children. The tour included a number of very good story windows depicting various Arabian stories such as Ali Baba, Aladdin, Sinbad, Pegasus and Cyclops. The gardens had great displays of giant crocodiles, scorpions, other creatures and window displays of harems, sultans and assorted folk representing bygone eras.

Meanwhile the men went off to drink coffee and puff away on chichas. The origin of the chicha is something of a mystery. The name is Persian for glass, a reference to the vessel, which would appear to indicate that the pipe came to the Arab world from Iran. Another name is nargila, from the Persian for coconut – indicates what the vessel was originally made from, and suggests an origin in the tropics. The chicha must have predated the introduction of tobacco, as there were sophisticated water-pipes in Iran as soon as that pernicious weed arrived.

Tobacco historian Alfred Dunhill suggested in the 1950s that the chicha started out in East Africa as a cannabis pipe (Iran had longstanding trade links with that region), and archaeological finds in Ethiopia have since proved him right.

I was disappointed we did not visit the Cherait Museum– a historical museum mainly dealing with Turkish & French colonial periods and which has a long standing association with Adelwahab’s family and their history in Tunisia.



Cherait Museum, Tozeur

I would have also liked to have done a town tour in one of the many beautifully decorated caleches, the horse-drawn carriages, used as an environmentally more attractive, not to mention, more picturesque, alternative to the squeezy little Fiat taxis used all over Tunisia for transportation. They reminded me of my sojourn in New Orleans and other places throughout Louisiana in the US.

Tozeur, like some other places we have visited has strong evidence of French colonial architecture, and I noticed in Tozeur, a more cosmopolitan mix among the people – more mixture of French, British, southern and east African, and decidedly non-Arab intermarriage reflected in peoples’ complexions.

In contrast, Gafsa’s people seem to be mostly Arab, meaning there does not appear to be that broader blending of other cultures and facial characteristics, or diversity of culture and dress as others. At the same time I do note that Gafsians have their own range of diverse dress and fashion and cultural traits that are specifically Arab in nature – and very colourful and attractive too.

Help, I’m sounding like those colonials speaking of mixed-races, half-castes and the like!! Reminding myself of all those colonial gazers, all those culture vultures – anthropologists and sociologists and the like or as Michael Ames (Cannibal Tours and Glass Boxes) names them “academic mercenaries” Please forgive me!!



Tozeur, date palms & the oasis

Tozeur is surrounded by oases – I am told over one million date palms, which give seemingly never-ending supply of succulent and nutritious dates (over 120 varieties), the finest being (mostly from Tamaghza and Tozeur) deglat en nour – “finger of light”.

Our next trip – 27-28 December is to Douz.

We are off to the 42nd Sahara International Festival. This years two themes are ‘Women in Bedwin Life’ & ‘Cavalry in desert men’s everyday life’ – there is also an international colloquium involving Tunisian and foreign scholars to be held, a desert poetry contest and other activities.

I’m hoping the camel fighting event has been cancelled. I have yet to learn more about the history of the M’raziques tribe which I’m told is the true legend behind the entire desert culture and history, and the reason and driving force behind the current festival.

Apparently Jean Seran wrote in The Captain (in French I presume):

When we reach Douz, we have crossed a frontier and met a new world, a world apart, a world that rejects the rest of the world, retiring within itself, within its secular traditions, its still preserved customs, its still imperative ancestral orders. 

That world is called the M’raziques’ tribe.

Later we intend to visit Jerba or Djerba – a popular destination on the coast.

According to the Tunisia News:

Homer had made Djerba world famous by having his main protagonist in The Ilyad, Ulysses, Penelope’s husband, not only accost in the island, but also fall asleep there after eating a certain fruit which is believed to have been the date.

The capital Tunis also beckons and then once the winter blizzards have calmed down (indeed entirely gone away) we will head to Europe – Italy, France, GB perhaps, hopefully Spain – maybe even Sicily and Malta – who knows…

In closing – I am learning fast that I just don’t have the liberties of free expression that I have in Australia, even a joke can be taken out of context.

I am learning that I speak a totally different language – it seems the simplest comment can be immediately taken as a challenge and a criticism. Yes, I am a foreigner and an extremely ignorant one at that.

Almost the same experience as being a blackfella in the Northern Territory – living among all the “Aboriginal expert” consultants, lawyers, politicians etc. etc.

I am appreciating the use of the humble headscarf – especially when walking the dusty streets in the extremely cold mornings – those Arab (and desert) women (and men) are indeed smart. A simple strip of cloth offers so much to the comfort of the individual.

The English language Tunisia News published an article recently – “Unveiling Tunisia” – which stated:

A small percentage of women cover their hair but most leave it flowing freely. It is forbidden to cover one’s face with a hijab or to wear a burka…According to several Tunisians, wearing a veil over one’s hair is actually a personal choice (and possibly a family one) according to the values and beliefs of the woman herself. I have noticed quite the opposite and in fact notice that many women wear hijab, especially the younger women, and at the same time mostly wear western dress, that is very tight jeans and sometimes figure hugging, revealing clothes, so perhaps the hijab is part of a modern and trendy fashion statement. 

I must agree with a further statement in that same article that speaks of the elegance of Tunisian women: When a Tunisian woman wears a veil, it is always with style.

We have rented a fully self-contained, serviced villa in Rue El Kef, Zaroug, an outer and newer suburb of Gafsa, close to the University. We have our own gated entrance and courtyard, central heating, washing machine, hot water shower/bath and (western) toilet, good kitchen with gas stove, fridge etc. – all for 150TD (Tunisian Dinar) for the month. (1 dinar = $1AUS) Very cheap shopping for fresh veggies/fruit and bread is 28 cents a loaf…but I do miss not having a car.


