“OK before we get going, I’d like to unpack some issues. What I want from you is blue sky thinking, people. A brain dump. Try to wrap your minds around our mission-critical objectives. We’re creating a new design language. There are some terrific synergies right now. This is a unique opportunity to value-add for our stakeholders. Think of it as a paradigm shift. Your time starts now.”



Is it just me or is there an awful lot of corporate speak around at the moment?

It’s worse than two years ago, when Don Watson wrote his third anti-jargon book, Bendable Learnings.



‘It’s the language of a cad,” he told ABC radio. “It’s the language of someone who’s actually trying to escape the reality and is unwilling to be honest about it.” 

I recently sat through a meeting where the guy felt the need to “unpack” his “issues” 28 times (yes, I counted).

Now, I’m a time-poor working mother. The only things I unpack are school lunch boxes.

If he needs to unload this much, he should find a good shrink. 

I’m also sick of the 2009 idiom “cutting edge”. One radiology website boasts that it offers, “cutting edge technology applied to patient care”.

Well that’s a relief.

Here I was thinking that all the new whiz-bang machinery would be popped in a cupboard somewhere, instead of being “applied” to the actual patients.

Kevin Rudd’s a classic. Speaking about the no fly zone in Libya, the Ruddbot referred to the “operationalisation” of the UN plan.

This is actually a word, according to Wikipedia.

“Operationalisation is the process of defining a fuzzy concept so as to make the concept clearly distinguishable (in humanities) or measurable (in physicalist sciences) and to understand it in terms of empirical observations. In a wider sense it refers to the process of specifying the extension of a concept - in other words, describing what is and is not a part of that concept.”

But what about “When the UN takes action”?

In a recent speech, the CEO of OneSteel Geoff Plumme appears to have a stutter, repeating the word ‘sustainability’. 

That’s a weasel word if ever I’ve heard one. You’re making steel, not saving the planet. 

I’m pleased to hear that the WA Chamber of Commerce and Industry has done a “Full Plate Review”.

‘Cos a lot of them end up chipped and damaged if they’ve been in the office cupboard for too long.

One of the Chamber’s graphics identifies “approaches” with “primary carriage”. Would that be horse-drawn? Sulky or stagecoach?

Methinks it’s more of a pumpkin.

The kids were confused last week when we met with a landscaper about plans for our new house.

She kept talking about the “design language”.

“Is that like French, Mummy?” Grace enquired. “More like Swahili darling,” I replied. 

Don’t get me started on the use of nouns as verbs.

Leveraged – aarrrgggh! Impact – eeekkk! Liason – please don’t! Dialogue – stop, I can’t take it any more!

In the words of Lord Blackadder, it makes me want to put underpants on my head, shove a pencil up each nostril and go “wibble” at passers-by.

Why anyone would say “wrap your mind around” instead of “understand” is beyond me.

George Orwell was right: “Most educated people don’t realise how little impression abstract words make on the average man.”

What are your favourite weasel words?

The winner will receive a fully integrated, synergised paradigm shift, which they can utilise to leverage valuable stakeholders.

Let’s hope it’s not too uncomfortable stuck up there.


