If you’re a science or nuclear energy buff, you’ll have to excuse us for starting pretty much at the bottom of the knowledge tree here. First of all, let’s define a meltdown: basically it’s when the core of a nuclear reactor is unable to cool, because of some kind of system failure like, oh, a 10 metre wall of sea water crashing into a nuclear power plant. Radiation can then be released, and that’s when things get really dangerous. So is it happening in Japan? Latest reports say no, not yet and hopefully not at all.



Click this link for an incredible series of graphics on the internal workings of the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station, pictured above. This really is some amazing work the New York Times has done at short notice. There’s another really helpful infographic here:

Despite what appears to be an easing - or at least a temporary containment - of the threat of a major radiation leak, let’s dwell briefly on the worst case scenario. Could we be facing another Three Mile Island or Chernobyl? The answer, according to the Science Media Centre of Japan, is almost certainly no. Read a full Q&A at the SMCJ website here. Highly informative, yet accessible, material. Well done them.



Without question the best commentary we’ve heard on this issue from an Australian comes from Dr John Price of Monash University in this piece on news.com.au. Dr Price is one of the few Australians with a working knowledge of the design and construction of modern nuclear power plants. If you need a soothing voice to take you through the safety measures, and the extra safety measures built in behind those, he’s your man.

If you want a combination of the macro and micro view of what’s going on at the damaged Japanese plants, click this link. It’s a link to World Nuclear News, the website of the World Nuclear Association, a pro-nukes group. Despite its underlying pro-nukes agenda, their coverage of this unfolding disaster is great ear-to-the-ground stuff with minute-to-minute logistics of the clean-up. For now at least, this is more reportage than PR.

Some of these links were provided by the Australian Science Media Centre. Check their website for a whole range of articles related to Japan’s nuclear threat, and the earthquake and tsunami which triggered it.

And if you need some light relief from all this, sort of, here’s a rather poignant cartoon.


